Create 2024-08-29-condaEnvs.md (#236)
ARCLeeds/arcleeds.github.io: blog/_posts/2024-08-29-condaEnvs.md

"
author: Maeve Murphy Quinlan
image:
  thumb: research_hack.jpg
  caption: Managing conda environments can be the difference between smooth sailing and dependency hell
---

# Recording and exporting conda environments for Python

When it comes to version and package management for Python, there are an overwhelming number of options, including minimal approaches including [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv), [pipenv](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/), and [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html); conda-centric approaches including [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/), [Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/), and [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge), and multi-featured package and project-management tools such as [Pixi](https://pixi.sh/latest/) and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/).

Depending on your specific use-case, some of these tools may be better suited to your project; for example, if you are developing a package and want to build your binaries locally, Poetry might be a great solution for you. If you want to install scientific packages from certain conda channels, one of the conda ecosystem options might suit you best.

> Let's assume you are working within a research group that generally uses conda envs, and you are installing software that frequently includes conda-related install instructions. We recommend using [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge), the open source Mamba-enabled tool that is essentially drop-and-replace with conda.

Reviewer: I don't think this is right.  Mambaforge was the drop in replacement that's mamba enabled.  Miniforge is just the version of miniconda that only defaults to using conda-forge, so avoids license issues of the anaconda repositories.

Author: So I thought this, but then I got a bit confused by the release notes that imply mambaforge and miniforge are now basically the same?

https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge

> After the release of Miniforge 23.3.1 in August 2023, Miniforge and Mambaforge are essentially identical. The only difference is the name of the installer and subsequently the default installation path.

> Before that release, Miniforge only shipped conda, while Mambaforge added mamba on top. Since Miniconda started shipping conda-libmamba-solver in July 2023, Miniforge followed suit and started shipping it too in August. At that point, since conda-libmamba-solver depends on libmambapy, the only difference between Miniforge and Mambaforge was the presence of the mamba Python package. To minimize surprises, we decided to add mamba to Miniforge too.

I wasn't sure how best to phrase the above. Will add in a comment on the licensing too, and maybe find a good link to somewhere discussing it.

Reviewer: No that's fine, I'm out of date.

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

Of course, if needed, you can always add more packages to this later by running `conda install package-name` from inside the active environment.

### Adding `pip` packages to your conda env

Adding packages with `pip` introduces messiness and complexity when it comes to dependency management and organisation, but sometimes it cannot be avoided.

> Remember, once you have installed `pip` and `pip`-dependent packages in your environment, you can't return to using `conda install` without everything likely breaking.

If you know from the get-go that you need `pip` installed in your environment, you can include it in your `environment.yml` file:

```yml
name: mkdocs-env
channels:
  - defaults
dependencies:
  - python=3.12
  - pip
  - pip:
    - mkdocs
    - "mkdocstrings[python]"
    - mkdocs-material
```

This file contains packages required to build a documentation website using `mkdocs`.

## Using your environment

If you have a selection of similar environments that have subtly differing package versions, make sure you record exactly which environment you are using for your research calculations.

> Ideally, all your results should be produced with the same environment, as trying to keep track of when you added or updated a package in an environment can become very messy very quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, all your results should be produced with the same environment, as trying to keep track of when you added or updated a package in an environment can become very messy, very quickly.
```

## Recording your environment

Recording your environment is really important, both for ensuring that your research computing work is transparent (with exact versions of packages used to produce results recorded) and reproducible (by making it possible for people to recreate your working environment). Of course, if you create your environment from an `environment.yml` file then you have a ready-made recipe for people to build an equivalent environment, but if you want to record the exact versions of packages used (which you should want to do!) or if you added additional packages later, you can export your environment.

There are quite a few different ways to export your conda environment. The most straightforward is to simply call `export` from within your active environment:

```bash
conda env export > environment.yml # from inside the env
```

This will create a record with every package and its version in your environment, including background dependencies that you did not specify but were required by your packages. This file will include specific builds of packages and a path to the environment directory on your machine.

> > This is a really useful record of the exact environment you used to create your results; however, it is not useable to create a new environment from due to specified builds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This is a really useful record of the exact environment you used to create your results; however, it is not broadly usable to create a new environment from due to specified builds
```
